---
layout: post
title: Stir it Up
date: 2015-05-29 11:16
type: opinion
category: opinion
tags:
 - discrimination
 - segregation
 - minority
 - women
 - colored
 - integration
 - diversity
 - social
 - opinion
 - psychology
mathjax: true
description: |
  Just an opinion (my opinion) on the efforts out there to organize events for
  minority members.
emojify: true
---
I've been thinking about something lately. Nowadays, I read more about ideas to
organize events that cater to minority audiences like women in certain branches
(like tech) or colored folks in certain branches (like tech). To some extent it
has even been executed.

I understand that these efforts serve to draw members of these minority groups
into the playing field and to grant them an accessible stage to share whatever
they have to offer.

Personally, I believe that we should focus our energy on getting more of
the supposed minority group members into the regular events
:ticket:, but not simply for the sake of being a member of the
group but by merit of their expertise.

Just invite more women to speak at tech conferences, grant more members of
other minority groups &mdash;whether minority means: foreign, colored, non-academic,
female or non Klingon speaker, for that matter&mdash; stage time at your regular
events. That could pretty much do it.

Creating separate events is only reinforcing that sense of segregation that
some may feel there is because people already do quite well in [developing a
postive bias for members of their group][race] (whatever that may be) and this
is commonly referred to as _in-group/out-group bias_.
<div class="element video">
  <iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6QGNxRGgBwM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
[Even babies may naturally discriminate][baby], and I'm not saying it's a bad
thing. Sticking with the folks you relate to may been the reason the human
race survived the perils of the wild. Bottomline is that setting up a
blockparty for members of the same in-group most likely will not result to a
significant alteration of subliminally-kept notions within that group because
it provides little opportunity for understanding and appreciating the qualities
and views of the other groups beyond.

<blockquote>
In-group/out-group bias may explain why male coders think higher of female
coders. It's most likely a group because of many reasons which may include a
lack of social skill in communicating with the opposite sex, a certain sense of
humor and the fear to offend... So guess what... The boys stick together
because they understand one another easily. You don't get girl coders well
integrated into the group until both parties start to learn how to understand
and appreciate another, and generally you don't accomplish them by having
organizing a rally for the girls. No, just have them work together and discuss
the intricacies of their interactions.
<div class="element video">
  <iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ga4Zr7P25o0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
</blockquote>

It's great to address these issues so please continue, but keep the discussion
open. Don't market it as an event for group $x$, because many of the great
minds of group $y$ and $z$ will not just invite themselves.

<blockquote>
Not spewing fire :fire:, but I believe that whatever is said
at TEDx Women should be said on regular TEDx events, by women. Just grant them
the mainstage at the main event, but then again... I'm just a simple engineer
talking about something that would be considered the domain of social
psychologists. What do I know :grimacing:. *shrugs*
</blockquote>

Don't do it for me, because I get in wherever and I'm far too easy. I'm just
sharing my 2 cents here because I believe the world's efforts to grant people a
stage could be executed more effectively.

<blockquote>
Ran into this video online which is quite nice to listen to, just give it a
try and if you're into gaming :video_game:, you'll have
something to watch as well.
<div class="element video">
  <iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9RZ13rgCcww" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
</blockquote>

[race]: http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/the_kids/2014/03/teaching_tolerance_how_white_parents_should_talk_to_their_kids_about_race.html
[baby]: http://www.newsweek.com/even-babies-discriminate-nurtureshock-excerpt-79233
