---
layout: post
title: Transmission Primer
description: |
  Just the bare minum to get started with Transmission from the CLI.
date:  2019-04-24 22:07:28 +0200
type: tools # for icon
category: tools # for url
tags:
 - tools
 - autogenerated
 - torrent
 - magnet
 - transmission
 - transmission-cli
og:
  type: article # http://ogp.me/#types
#  og:type: #
#   - og:value: value
#     og:attr: foo
#   - og:value: value
#image: https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/vid.bina.me/img/brexit.png
#twitter:
#  card: summary
#  image: https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/vid.bina.me/img/brexit.png
head: mugshot
---
Start the download of a magnet URL by running

```
transmission-cli MAGNET_URL
```

which will download your torrent into the download directory which you will
find defined within the `download-dir` field inside the
~/.config/transmission/settings.json file. Unless specified otherwise, it will
default to your ~/Downloads directory.

# Daemon

Start the Transmission daemon by running

```
transmission-daemon
```

which start the daemon in the background and opens up a [web portal on port
9091](http://localhost:9091).

## Remote

With the Transmission daemon started, one can use `transmission-remote` to
control the torrent client.

Some of the information for your daemon can observed through the output of

```
transmission-remote -si
```

which is short for

```
transmission-remote --session-info
```

and prints information regarding:
 - networking settings
   - listening ports
   - download/upload speed restrictions
 - storage settings
   - daemon configuration file
   - download directory

some of which is accessible through the Preferences modal in the web portal.

From now on, I'll just print short and long versions of commands within the
same block as follows:

```
short snippet
longer, more verbose, snippet which is often easier to interpret
```

### Add Torrent

In order to download a torrent through the daemon run

```
transmission-remote -a TORRENT_URL
transmission-remote --add TORRENT_URL
```

### Remote Torrent

Remove a torrent by id. Examine the [Select Torrents](#select-torrents) section
on how to find the id for a torrent (spoiler: list `transmission-remote -l` as
documented in the [List Torrents](#list-torrents) section)

```
transmission-remote -r TORRENT_ID
transmission-remote --remove TORRENT_ID
```

### List Torrents

One may list Torrents by running

```
transmission-remote -l
transmission-remote --list
```

<div class="element note">
Note that torrents are listed with an ID column which provides the identifier
to use in referencing a particular torrent in commands.
</div>

### Select Torrents

While [listing torrents](#list-torrents) you may have observed that the
torrents are listed by ID. This ID can used to specify a torrent through the
`-t` or `--torrent` argument.

Failing to select the torrents to operate on may in some cases default to
`-tall` or `--torrent all` to list all torrents.

Specify multiple ids by separating them with commas as follows

```
-t4,2,99
-t 4,2,99
```

### Start Torrent

Start a torrent by running

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -s
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --stop
```

### Stop torrent

Stop a Torrent by running

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -S
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --stop
```

and yes, since `-s` is already reserved for `--start`, you observe how the
short version may not always be very self-explanatory.

### List the files for a given torrent

In order to list the files that comprise torrent 3, for example, one may run:

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -f
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --files
```

### Show info for a given torrent

In order to observe the magnet link, the directory into which it is being
downloaded, the relevant download metrics and a bit of history for a given
torrent, one may run:

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -i
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --info
```

### List info trackers for torrent

The info trackers are the resources connected to, generally over port 6969,
that keep track of where a Torrent is to be downloaded from and which seeders
and leechers are connected. Run the following command to find out which
trackers are known for the torrent of interest:

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -it
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --info-trackers
```

### Add a tracker for a given Torrent

In case you want to manually add a tracker for a torrent, run

```
transmission-remote -t 3 -td TRACKER
transmission-remote --torrent 3 --tracker-add TRACKER
```

and replace `TRACKER` with the URL of the tracker you're wanting to add.

## More Reading

 - [transmission-remote(1) - Linux man page][man-page]
 - [Transmission CLI User Guide][transmission-cli-ck]

[man-page]: https://linux.die.net/man/1/transmission-remote
[transmission-cli-ck]: https://cli-ck.io/transmission-cli-user-guide/
