---
layout: post
title: On The Entrepreneurial Environment in Europe
description: |
  Add a description to this article here. Keep it short and sweet.
date:  2020-04-01 11:49:04 +0000
type: enterpreneurship # for icon
category: enterpreneurship # for url
tags:
 - enterpreneurship
 - autogenerated
og:
  type: article # http://ogp.me/#types
#  og:type: # 
#   - og:value: value
#     og:attr: foo
#   - og:value: value
#image: https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/vid.bina.me/img/brexit.png
#twitter:
#  card: summary
#  image: https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/vid.bina.me/img/brexit.png
head: mugshot
---
A friend and I have recently picked up the writing exercise of posing each
other questions to use as the basis of a series of posts. Elward, ended up
asking:

> We hebben gezien dat Europa niet zo succesvol is geweest als America in het
> produceren van de grote technologische bedrijven van de afgelopen decenia.
> Kijk bijvoorbeeld naar Google, Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft dat zijn
> allemaal Americaanse bedrijven. Jij hebt zowel in Nederland als Duitsland de
> start-up wereld van dichtbij meegemaakt en je hebt ook ervaring met de
> international start-up wereld. Wat zou jij zeggen dat 1 van de grote oorzaken
> is die hieraan ten grondslag ligt. Welke andere dingen liggen hieraan ten
> grondslag. Is er een groot verschil in het ondernemers klimaat van Nederland
> en Duitsland m.b.t. het bovenstaande?

which I'll roughly translate into the following hoping that Elward will be
graceful enough to forgive me where I inadvertently loose any of the points in
translation:

> We have observed that Europe has not proved as successful as the United
> Stated in producing the dominant tech companies. Amazon, Apple, Facebook,
> Google and Microsoft all American firms. Considering you're experiences in
> the startup scene in The Netherlands and Germany as well as the internation
> startup scene beyond that, what would you attribute this phenomenon to.
> Which factors contribute to America's dominant position in startups and what
> are the differences between the startup ecosystems that allow for America to
> perform this exceptionally.

:warning: Before continuing, it is important to not my musings represent
opinions derived from anecdotes and historical record, both of which may be
contested although the.

## Venture Capital

The period from the 15th century till the 17th century is commonly hailed as
the [**Age of Discovery**][ageofdiscovery] or **Age of Exploration** in which
European priorities shifted towards exploring what they considered foreign or
unknown lands in an effort to secure trade routes and access to sought after
resources for geo-political (even if _geo_ may have been at a different scale
than we know it now :wink:) and economic reasons.

This age of exploration was effectively made possible by **adventurers**, or
[**entrepreneurs**][entrepreneur-etymology] as we would start calling such
"types" in 18th century, who **ventured** out into the unknown in order to
pursue riches with their eclectic crews comprised of the vessel owners,
sailors, expedition administrative staff members, artisans and at times what
some may consider nut-jobs or degenerates.

[columbus-crew]: http://www.christopher-columbus.eu/ships-crew.htm

Vasco da Gama and Christopher Columbus are among the most commonly known of
such adventurers and the sponsors of their ventures, typically monarchs,
effectively became the first to provide _venture capital_ if you will.

During the [Industrial Age][industrial-age], venture capital reared its head
again albeit it in a slightly different form factor. Instead of dispatching
expeditions, capital was, among other things, dispatched to finance the
development of better machinery, the waging of intellectual property battles
with great furore, the construction of railroads and the surveying for precious
natural resources such as oil and gold.

[industrial-rev]: https://study.com/academy/lesson/the-industrial-revolution-in-europe-and-the-us-events-innovations.html
[industrial-age]: https://www.history.com/topics/industrial-revolution/industrial-revolution
[gold-rush]: https://www.history.com/topics/westward-expansion/gold-rush-of-1849


- [Understanding the Industrial Revolution][charles-more] by Charles More
- [Reconceptualizing the Industrial Revolution][roe-smith] by Roe Smith and
  edited by Jeff Horn, Leonard N. Rosenband, Merritt

[charles-more]: https://books.google.de/books?id=D2aFAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA6&lpg=PA6&dq=risky+investments+industrial+age&source=bl&ots=SDHEJczjqN&sig=ACfU3U0qU1432A_ldLhibCsa6Gmd-yP7cQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiD6IGUq8foAhUCDOwKHV8rB2IQ6AEwAHoECAoQKA#v=onepage&q=risky%20investments%20industrial%20age&f=false
[roe-smith]: https://books.google.de/books?id=Y8DQKhDqC50C&pg=PA34&lpg=PA34&dq=risky+investments+industrial+age&source=bl&ots=zRuuqoaYi3&sig=ACfU3U2piIOCwVWfGnkQXnywp04DOoIYmg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiD6IGUq8foAhUCDOwKHV8rB2IQ6AEwAnoECAoQNQ#v=snippet&q=risk&f=false

[ms]: https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/fourth-industrial-revolution

<!-- Samuel Slater (textile) -->
<!-- iron production -->

Arguably, the United States was still in its nascent stages during that
so-called Age of Exploration but towards the ending of the 18th century,
however; America found itself in a much better state to take part in the
industrial age, rat race of the times.

England was more or less the cradle of industrialization, but one would be
remiss if they mentioned industrialization and Europe in a text but managed to
avoid addressing the role of Germany in the movement, considering that Germany
is more or less hailed as the pinnacle of modern European industrialization.

Reunification of formerly quibbling states by Otto von Bismarck effectively
paved the way for Germany to take advantage of its abundance in resources and
opportunity. Protectionist measures, government support for industry and
artisanship, incentives towards technical education, the development of a
welfare system, the breathing room for a pragmatic insurance and banking sector
and considerable investments in infrastructure (rail and road), may have
contributed towards Germany step up in comparison to its nearest neighbor at
scale, across that proverbial "pond".

I would regard Bertha Benz, born Ringer, as one of the notable German venture
capitalist of that time. Stemming from nobility, she effectively fell for a
mechanically inclined regular-Joe who happened to operate a troubled business
with his partner. Bertha provided capital to allow Karl to buy out his partner
and focus on getting the company back on track. Understandably some may
consider Bertha more of an angel investor, but it must be noted that a pivot
from a sheet-metal working shop to a engine manufacturing operation is
considerable and risky enough to claim otherwise.

There are more of such tales of lovers, acquaintances and institutions across
the continent providing the breathing room for interesting ventures to take
root, but it also seems that European investors in general have grown
increasingly prudent in their allocation of capital to ventures. This, to the
extend that new (or "so new" that it is still colloquially classified as crazy)
ideas often find it challenging to take root in Europe on account of the
scarcity of capital while the same ideas seem to find fertile soil in America
more readily.

I often joke about this among my acquaintances and it seems that more
entrepreneurs tend to share the viewpoint that European investors are a
different creature to the American investor who seems to have internalized the
direct relationship between risk and reward so well that they seem more capable
of comfortably taking risks. Europe may have grown partial to financial
security, social security and stability over the years and it is hard to say if
the trauma of recent European history plays a role here.

Mind you, I'm not an anthropologist, historian, sociologist or psychologist but
merely an engineer with too many opinions about topics I don't possess
sufficient depth in even though I'm constantly looking into these topics to
"wisen up".

[bbenz]: www.cicero.de/kapital/bertha-benz-die-erste-frau-am-steuer/41482

[ageofdiscovery]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Age_of_Discovery
[entrepreneur-etymology]: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/entrepreneur#French

## Bigger is Better?

The differences between the entrepreneurial climates may very well have a
strong cultural component. On multiple occasions I have heard folks simplify
the American ethos to one-liners such as "Bigger is Better", "Go Big or Go
Home" and "Time is Money". This is strongly contrasted against Puritanical
views that have shaped The Netherlands and Germany, in particular. In fact, the
Dutch[^dutch] proudly wear their Calvinistic tendencies as a badge of honor and
don't shy away from using this as ammunition when engaging in self-ridicule.

[^dutch]: Just picking on the Dutch since I was born in The Netherlands and carry a Dutch passport, so if anything, I'm one of them too.

Deification of "self-made"-ness is another aspect that seems so central to
American culture that it becomes difficult to overlook. My goodness, everyone
has started from some bottom in the US of A. How many stories about folks
entering the land of opportunity must one still hear that include some line to
the effect of having but a dollar to one's name or even better, a sum
denominated in pennies to emphasize how low one set off at the start their
journey?  Even America's current, definitely not middle-class President, has
more or less made the "started from the bottom" claim stating that he only
received a "small" loan from his father.

These seemingly unrelated and insignificant details of American culture
propagate nearly every stratum of society. Success is greatly celebrated, wins
and decorations are worn with pride and losing... well, it sucks but the good
part is that you can always try again because the pursuit of happiness doesn't
end with a loss.

To America's credit, the acceptance of losses as a part of one's experience
that one should embrace is something that Europe is starting to catch on to.
Failing your company to the point of bankruptcy will still produce a battle
scar that Europe will not allow you to forget easily, but at least we're
starting to understand that one does not get the gains from exploration without
accepting that it requires some folks heading into wrong directions to fail.


<!--
"if you've got it, flaunt it"
-->

I served a startup around the beginning of 2018 which brought me to the valley
and New York on several occasions. My impression of the organization was that
it was tremendously disorganised and I mean disorganized to the extent that
most of my fellow European founders would consider it a matter of gross
negligence. Plans shifted by the minute, communications were often unclear, the
chain of command was apparently defective or crucial links were missing and
everything just felt as if it existed in a state of utmost entropy at all
times. The sharing of my observation was generally received with a "well you
don't quite get it, this is how we roll in the US" or some variation thereof.
